---
layout: post
title: "Watchdogs"
author: Brian
---

Wireless networks have a bit of a reputation for instability. Modern hardware has fixed most hardware problems, but there is a bit of work that needs to be done to make the firmware reliable. You can do this with "watchdog" scripts.

Our firmware image (based on qMp) comes with a "bmx6health" script that checks whether the mesh software is running correctly and restarts it if necessary. This script by default runs once per day. I've found it better to run this every 5 minutes. You can do this by editing the crontab-

ssh into the router and in the terminal-

```
crontab -e
```

This opens a [vi editor](http://www.lagmonster.org/docs/vi.html) and you can change or add different scripts to run at different times. (The vi commands you need are "i" to insert, "esc" to stop editing, and ":x" to save and eXit.)

And change the start of bmx6health line to `*/5`:

```
*/5 * * * * /etc/qmp/bmx6health.sh >> /tmp/log/bmx6health.log
```

`*/5 * * * *` means once every 5 minutes.

For some nodes, their main purpose is to be an internet gateway. To ensure that they always try to be online, you can add a watchdog script that pings a known website and calls "network restart" if it fails. These kind of scripts often ping 8.8.8.8, which is Google's DNS server.

I've discovered 3 common ways to recover a qMp mesh router that has lost internet- network restart, bmx6 restart and restarting dnsmasq. Sometimes the dns forwarder, dnsmasq will stop working correctly letting you ping some things and not others. dnsmasq will then forward bad dns info to the other routers too so it needs to be fixed quickly! ```killall dnsmasq; dnsmasq start``` will fix it.

gwck is a qMp utility that is restarted after network restart.

in the terminal-

```
vi /root/wan-watchdog.sh
```

and paste this:

```
#!/bin/sh

# restart network if either ping google.com or 8.8.8.8 fails
if /bin/ping -c 1 google.com >/dev/null && /bin/ping -c 1 8.8.8.8 >/dev/null
    then
       echo "ping google success"
       exit 0
fi

echo "[$(date)] network restart" >> /tmp/log/wan-watchdog.log
/etc/init.d/network restart
if /etc/init.d/gwck enabled
     then
        /etc/init.d/gwck restart
fi
/etc/init.d/bmx6 restart
sleep 4
killall dnsmasq
/etc/init.d/dnsmasq start
```

Make it executable- 

```
chmod +x /root/wan-watchdog.sh
```

Afterwards, add the following entry with crontab -e

```
*/7 * * * * /root/wan-watchdog.sh
```

I made this every 7 minutes as I think you could get a cascade of restarts if you have every node checking every minute. Also it could disrupt mesh-only traffic if the check was too often.

Another problem I've had occasionally is that the wifi will lose connections. Even though the radio is on and the router lights are normal you can't connect. I've written a simple script to restart wifi if both the ad-hoc and access point interfaces have no connections. It is a bit of a hack since the interface may be ok, but since nothing is connected it doesn't hurt to restart it.

Here's wifi-watchdog.sh script. Add it like the other script above. It also writes a log of the last time it reloaded. By default wlan0 is the ad-hoc interface that is used to mesh the routers and wlan0ap is the access point. This script is just for single-band routers running both AP and AdHoc. 

I'm using "Signal: unknown" to show there is no connection. It seems to work reliably. You could also try iwinfo wlan0 assoclist.

I see that sleep 5 is usual between "wifi down" and "wifi up". It isn't really necessary when there are no connections.

```
APSIGNAL=`iwinfo wlan0ap info | grep 'Signal: unknown' | wc -l`
AHSIGNAL=`iwinfo wlan0 info | grep 'Signal: unknown' | wc -l`
if [ $APSIGNAL = "0" ] || [ $AHSIGNAL = "0" ]; then
  # there is a connection to wlan0ap OR wlan0
  echo "wifi working"
else
  # no connections to wifi ("Signal: unknown"), so restart wifi in case it is down
  echo "[$(date)] no connections, restart wifi" > /tmp/log/wifi-watchdog.log
  wifi down
  sleep 5
  wifi up
fi
```

[Email me](mailto:brian@nycmesh.net) if you have any suggestions.



