---
layout: post
title: "Watchdogs"
author: Brian
---

Wireless networks have a bit of a reputation for instability. Modern hardware has fixed most hardware problems, but there is work that needs to be done to make the firmware reliable. You can do this with "watchdog" scripts. I haven't had to reboot a router since running our watchdog script.

Our firmware image (based on qMp) comes with a "bmx6health" script that checks whether the mesh software is running correctly and restarts it if necessary. This script by default runs once per day. I've found it better to run this every 5 minutes. You can do this by editing the crontab-

ssh into the router and in the terminal-

```
crontab -e
```

This opens a [vi editor](http://www.lagmonster.org/docs/vi.html) and you can change or add different scripts to run at different times. (The vi commands you need are "i" to insert, "esc" to stop editing, and ":x" to save and eXit.)

And change the start of bmx6health line to `*/5`:

```
*/5 * * * * /etc/qmp/bmx6health.sh >> /tmp/log/bmx6health.log
```

`*/5 * * * *` means once every 5 minutes.

For some nodes, their main purpose is to be an internet gateway. To ensure that they always try to be online, you can add a watchdog script that pings a known website and calls "network restart" if it fails. These kind of scripts often ping 8.8.8.8, which is Google's DNS server.

I've discovered 3 ways to recover a qMp mesh router that has functioning wifi but has lost internet- ```network restart```, ```bmx6 restart``` and restarting dnsmasq-```killall dnsmasq; dnsmasq start```. Sometimes the dns forwarder, dnsmasq will stop working correctly letting you ping some things and not others. dnsmasq will then forward bad dns info to the other routers too so it needs to be fixed quickly! ```killall dnsmasq; dnsmasq start``` will fix it.

gwck is a qMp utility that is restarted after network restart.

Another problem I've had occasionally is that the wifi will lose connections. Even though the radio is on and the router lights are normal you can't connect. I've written a simple script to restart wifi if both the ad-hoc and access point interfaces have no connections. It is a bit of a hack since the interface may be ok, but since nothing is connected via wifi it doesn't hurt too much to restart it. I've also found that a network restart is necessary to make the wifi stable.

By default wlan0 is the ad-hoc interface that is used to mesh the routers and wlan0ap is the access point. This script checks to see the number of wireless interfaces so it works with dual-band routers and routers that are only ad-hoc or ap.

I'm using "Signal: unknown" to show there is no connection. It seems to work reliably. You could also try iwinfo wlan0 assoclist.

"sleep 5" is usual between "wifi down" and "wifi up". I've found it not necessary when there are no connections, but I'll leave it there in case.

in the terminal-

```
vi /root/mesh-watchdog.sh
```

and paste this:

```
#!/bin/sh
# mesh-watchdog v1.0, NYC Mesh, Brian Hall

restartWifi()
{
  wifi down
  sleep 5
  wifi up
}

restartNetwork()
{
  /etc/init.d/network restart
  if /etc/init.d/gwck enabled; then
    /etc/init.d/gwck restart
  fi
  /etc/init.d/bmx6 restart
  sleep 4
  killall dnsmasq
  /etc/init.d/dnsmasq start
}

# count the number of wlan interfaces
# if there are more than 0 and they are all down then restart wifi

IWINFO=`iwinfo`
# find lines containing "ESSID"|get name (previous word)|replace return with ","
WI=`echo "$IWINFO" | grep ESSID | grep -Eo '^[^ ]+' | sed ':a;N;$!ba;s/\n/, /g`
WLAN=`echo "$WI" | wc -w`
NOSIGNAL=`echo "$IWINFO" | grep 'Signal: unknown' | wc -l`

if [ $WLAN -eq 0 ]; then
  echo "wifi disabled"
elif [ $WLAN -eq $NOSIGNAL ]; then
  # write log and restart network
  echo "[$(date)] restart wifi- wlans:$WLAN no-signal:$NOSIGNAL interfaces:$WI" | tee -a /tmp/log/mesh-watchdog.
  restartWifi
  sleep 60
  restartNetwork
  exit 1
else
  echo "wifi:ok	wlans:$WLAN	no-signal:$NOSIGNAL	interfaces:$WI"
fi

# restart network if ping google.com && 8.8.8.8 fails 4 times
count=1
while [ "$count" -le 4 ]
 do
   if /bin/ping -c 1 google.com >/dev/null && /bin/ping -c 1 8.8.8.8 >/dev/null; then
      echo "wan:ok	ping-count:$count"
      exit 0
   fi
 let count++
done
echo "[$(date)] network restart" | tee -a /tmp/log/mesh-watchdog.log
restartNetwork
```

Make it executable- 

```
chmod +x /root/mesh-watchdog.sh
```

Afterwards, add the following entry with crontab -e

```
*/3 * * * * /root/mesh-watchdog.sh
```

Don't make it less than every 3 minutes as it could cause multiple instances and it could disrupt mesh-only traffic.

Thanks to Nitin for help with the wifi problem and Zach for help with dnsmasq.

[Email me](mailto:brian@nycmesh.net) if you have any questions or suggestions.



