---
layout: post
title: "Help!"
author: Brian
---

**Ways you can help us:**

First [email us](mailto:slack@nycmesh.net?Subject=Join%20Slack&Body=Please%20add%20me%20to%20your Slack%20group,%20thanks!) and get on our Slack group. Then pick something from the list below-

**Installers**

We need to organize an install team. The involves climbing on roofs, drilling holes, running ethernet cable, crimping cable, antenna alignment, antenna channel selection. Join the #installs channel.

**Install Planning**

We have hundreds of node applications. See if you can join the rooftops together on our [map](https://nycmesh.net/map/) and plan an install. This takes lots of emailing and phone calls. Join the #installs channel.

**Network Admins**

Help us by monitoring nodes and alerting users to problems. Do you know Icinga or Nagios? Know how to write bash scripts? Join the #monitoring channel

**Neighborhood Organizers**

Distribute leaflets and help organize events in your neighborhood. Get your local community centers involved. Join the #neighborhoods channel

**Neighborhood internet gateway**

Set up a node on your rooftop to share your internet gateway. Join the #neighborhoods channel

**Hardware hackers**

Get our firmware running on more devices. We need support for cheap 2.4GHz and dual band routers. Join the #hardware and #software channels on Slack. Look for [nycmeshfeed](https://github.com/nycmeshnet/nycmeshfeed) on our [github](https://github.com/nycmeshnet).

**Donate Space**

We need a space to store cable and antennas and prepare installs.

**Grant writing**

Our very successful grant writer is leaving the country. We need someone to look up appropriate grants and write the applications. Join the #funding channel.




[Email me](mailto:brian@nycmesh.net) if you have any suggestions.



